Privilege has long been recognised as
a fundamental principle of English law.
For several hundred years, the law of
privilege has protected the right of clients
to communicate with their lawyers in
confidence, without fear that those
communications will later be disclosed to
third parties during the course of litigation.
However, the modern commercial context
has generated numerous challenges to the
law of privilege, most notably for areas in
which it is common practice for non-lawyers
to advise on legal matters.
These challenges are compounded further by
the ubiquitous use of electronic communication
and data storage; emails in particular are highly
vulnerable to widespread dissemination which
may undermine a document’s confidentiality. Even
in circumstances where privilege has arisen, it is
all too often lost at the click of a button, leaving
litigants facing the prospect of disclosing sensitive
documents to their adversaries and into the public
domain.
This briefing outlines the current status of
privilege from an English law perspective, before
addressing some common issues and scenarios
particular to in-house counsel in which they may
run the risk of making communications that lack
the protection of privilege.
The current status of privilege
The Supreme Court delivered its judgment in
early 2013 on the most recent case to consider
the limited scope of the law of privilege1
. The
judgment serves as a cautionary tale for those
across all industries who receive legal advice
from non-lawyers. The case concerned tax
advice given to Prudential plc by its external
accountants, disclosure of which had been
sought by the Revenue. The court ruled that
because the advice was given by non-lawyers
Prudential plc was not entitled to claim privilege.
This meant that all relevant communications
were fully disclosable, even though the advice
was indisputably legal in nature and had it been
given by a lawyer there would be no doubt as to
privilege attaching.
International
Commerce
June 2013
1	 R (Prudential Plc & Anor) v Special Commissioner of Income
Tax & Anor [2013] UKSC1.
THE LAW OF PRIVILEGE –
ISSUES FOR IN-HOUSE
LEGAL
02 International Commerce
The Prudential case concerned
legal advice privilege, a category of
privilege that attaches to confidential
communications between clients and
their lawyers during the “ordinary
course of [the client’s] business”. The
Supreme Court’s ruling reinforces the
strict rule that only communications
between lawyers and members of
the “client team” will benefit from the
protection of privilege. This contrasts
with another category of privilege,
litigation privilege, which applies
in circumstances in which legal
proceedings (such as court litigation
or arbitration) have either already
commenced or are highly likely to do
so. In this situation, communications
with third parties will also be safe from
disclosure, provided their dominant
purpose is linked to the conduct of the
proceedings.
The Supreme Court’s decision further
entrenched the “client team” concept
which emerged from the litigation in
the early 2000s between creditors
of the collapsed BCCI and the Bank
of England2
. The Court of Appeal’s
highly restrictive interpretation of who
exactly constitutes the “client” for the
purposes of obtaining legal advice
engenders a significant risk to clients
even in circumstances where the
advice has been given by an external
lawyer. Under the rule created by this
case, only employees of the advisee
client whose role it is to request and
receive advice from external lawyers
will be able to assert legal advice
privilege over those communications.
The meaning of “lawyer” and of “legal
advice” has also attracted considerable
judicial scrutiny, particularly within the
context of in-house legal. On this issue,
English law differs from the position in
the majority of European jurisdictions
as well as under EU law itself3
,
which considers in-house lawyers
“insufficiently independent” from their
employers to warrant the protection
of privilege. However, provided that
the communications in question
are confidential and concern advice
which is legal in nature (as opposed
to, for example, strategic or purely
commercial), and so long as the inhouse lawyer retains a valid practising
certificate, English law will still protect
them from disclosure to third parties.
Once a client has obtained confidential
advice from a lawyer over which it may
safely assert privilege, there follows
the enduring challenge of retaining it.
This issue underlines the distinction
between litigation privilege and legal
advice privilege, namely that the
former will attach to communications
with non-lawyer third parties while
the latter will not. Thus, if litigation is
reasonably in contemplation, imminent
or existing, and the purpose of the
communications is predominantly
connected to the proceedings,
litigation privilege will protect both
confidential advice obtained from nonlawyers and a lawyer’s advice which
the client has then forwarded to a third
party.
Conversely in the case of legal advice
privilege, the protection from disclosure
may be lost if the client shares with a
non-lawyer third party the confidential
legal advice received from a lawyer.
In these circumstances, the client
is taken to have waived its right to
assert privilege where the extent of
the document’s circulation is such that
it no longer fulfils the definition of a
confidential communication between
a client and its lawyer. That third party
may even include employees of the
same company who are not part of the
“client team”. Clients must therefore
exercise caution when disclosing parts
of documents or documents that form
part of a sequence (such as one email
in a chain), as it will be open to the
other parties in the litigation to force
disclosure of the remaining document
or documents over which the client
will be held to have waived its right to
privilege. This last principle applies to
both litigation privilege and legal advice
privilege.
Issues for in-house legal
1. A company is negotiating a share
purchase agreement with the
target’s vendors. The company’s
external accountants advise against
the proposed purchase due to their
concerns about the target’s tax
affairs. The company decides to go
ahead with the transaction anyway.
Within a few months of the deal
closing, a dispute arises with the
vendors in relation to the target’s
tax liability. Is the accountants’
advice disclosable? Would it make
a difference if the objection had
come from the company’s in-house
legal team?
At the time of signing the agreement,
there was no contemplation that
litigation would arise. Thus, there
would be no scope in this scenario
to assert an entitlement to litigation
privilege. This example is precisely the
sort of scenario that the Prudential
decision would exclude from the scope
of legal advice privilege. Even if the
accountants addressed their advice
to the in-house legal department, the
rule in Prudential would apply and their
advice would not attract the protection
of privilege.
2. Three Rivers District Council and others v The
Governor and Company of the Bank of England
[2003] EWCA Civ 474.
3. Thus in circumstances where a company is
under investigation from, for example, the EU
competition authorities, legal advice privilege
will not cover advice from in-house legal; see
Akzo Nobel Chemicals Limited v European
Commission [Case C-550/07].
International Commerce 03
If, however, in-house legal (being
legally qualified and retaining a
practising certificate) had raised the
same objection and offered the same
advice, then provided that the advice
itself was confidential, legal in nature
and confined to the negotiating team
(insofar as they are the relevant “client
team” in this scenario), then the
advice would attract privilege. The
same would be true if external lawyers
advised on the same issues, and
legal advice privilege would protect
the advice from disclosure in the later
dispute.
2. After an earlier dispute over delayed
delivery of a cargo consignment, a
member of the in-house legal team
advises a company employee over
email on general circumstances
in which it would be entitled to
refuse delivery of cargo on the
grounds of delay. The employee
explains that they are interested in
finding out if it is possible to reject a
cargo in circumstances where the
company has found a replacement
consignment at a lower price. Is the
email privileged?
Emails present the law of privilege
with a unique challenge. Preserving
the confidentiality of emails is
considerably more difficult than, for
example, letters. This is due to the
ease with which emails are circulated,
forwarded or copied to third parties,
frequently unknowingly or by accident.
It is crucial for the entitlement to and
maintenance of legal advice privilege
that the confidential advice is restricted
to members of the company’s “client
team”. Circulation to third parties of
these emails or others in the chain may
result in the loss or waiver of privilege
and the requirement to disclose the full
chain of emails.
This scenario would fail the test to
establish litigation privilege. At the
time it is given, in-house legal’s advice
is generic and not within the context
of specific, imminent litigation, thus
litigation privilege would not attach to
these communications.
In the absence of litigation privilege,
the question hinges on the identity
of the member of the in-house legal
team. If he or she retains a valid
practising certificate and is subject to
regulation by the Solicitors’ Regulation
Authority or Bar Council4
, provided
the advice is confidential (which it
clearly is) and legal in nature (again,
this seems certain here), then legal
advice privilege will attach to the email
communications.
3. A company’s in-house legal team
appoints an external law firm
to advise on a dispute with an
employee. The firm suggests the
merits are 50:50 and recommends
settlement. The relevant member
of the in-house legal team forwards
this advice to the head of HR
without copying in the firm, who
in turn forwards it to the head
of the department concerned
and the relevant employee’s line
manager. The line manager again
forwards the advice to the entire
management team of the project
on which the employee has been
working. Both in-house legal
and the HR manager add some
comments of their own about the
merits of the claim. Are the emails
privileged? Is the law firm’s advice
still privileged?
Where an external lawyer advises on
the merits of a claim, certainly litigation
privilege will apply. The forwarded
advice would remain privileged, subject
to any subsequent loss or waiver.
Let us imagine, however, that the
advice was more generic (in respect of
the company’s redundancy procedure,
for example) and that litigation privilege
did not apply. The possibility of legal
advice privilege attaching will depend
on the identity of the in-hous