4. COMMON IMMIGRATION APPLICATIONS FOR
LEGAL SERVICES ATTORNEYS
Below are explanations of a number of common immigration applications.
It’s always important before completing the application to fully read all relevant
statutory and regulatory language, as well as the instructions for filling out the
applications, which is generally found on the CIS website. Furthermore, applications are often rejected if any information is missing or not filled out on an application—therefore, even if a section is not applicable, it’s best to write “N/A” and
if the answer is none, it’s best to write “None.” USCIS has stated that “N/A” and
“none” are not interchangeable, so be sure to select which term is a more appropriate answer.
For applications submitted to CIS or to court, any non-English documents
need to be accompanied by an English translation with a certification by the translator of the accurateness and truthfulness of their translation. Recommended
language for the “Certificate of Translation” is the following:
I (translator) certify that I am competent to translate from (foreign
language) to English and that the foregoing translation of (name of document)
is accurate to the best of my ability.
All forms and the addendums must have an original signature. Letters of
support, medical evaluations and sworn declarations from witnesses and thirdparties should also have original signatures. However, for documentary evidence,
such as birth certificates, marriage certificates, and passports, submit copies not
originals.
4.1 FAMILY-BASED PETITIONS AND RELIEF UNDER THE VAWA,
(FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, WHO ARE MARRIED
TO, OR THE CHILD OF A US CITIZEN OR LPR, OR WHO ARE
PARENTS ABUSED BY A US CITIZEN SON OR DAUGHTER)
U.S. immigration law allows citizens and Legal Permanent Residents to petition for family members to obtain a status that makes them eligible to apply for
legal permanent residence. U.S. citizens are allowed to petition for their children,
spouses, siblings, and if the individual is at least 21 years old, their parents. LPRs
can petition for their spouses and parents, but only unmarried children and cannot
petition for siblings.
The U.S. citizen or Legal Permanent Resident must sponsor their spouse by
petitioning with CIS through an Alien Petition, Form I-130. The “intending immigrant” files an application to adjust status, Form I-485, after the I-130 is approved
(Note: the I-485 may be filed concurrently when the petitioner is a “immediate
relative”, as discussed infra). There are sometimes waiting times for certain family
members for an available immigrant visa number. U.S. citizens can immediately
file for their spouses, unmarried children under 21 and if they’re over 21, their
parents—these relatives are referred to as “immediate relatives.” Other U.S. citizen relatives and LPR relatives must wait in line until an immigrant visa is available. Once the Form I-130 is filed, CIS will assign the immigrant a priority date,
and once that priority date becomes “current,” it is possible to apply for legal permanent resident status. To determine when a priority date is current, one m